In the wake of compartmentalization of knowledge, most scientific domains got restricted to representational questions, such as, why does the moon orbit the Earth, or how does the human body function, etc., whereas philosophical pursuits attempted to find answers to more abstract concepts such as reality, knowledge, logic, and our place among them. In the study of reality, two of the prevalent approaches of understanding our being are essentialism and non-essentialism, that try to make sense of the complex human nature. Being a reductionist theory, essentialism boils down the complex human nature into a single attribute, called the essence. Many philosophers have tried to justify what the essence of a human being is, or what is means to be human. On the other hand, non-essentialism, argues that the human beings are the most complex beings in the known universe, and hence, cannot be reduced to a single attribute. Sartre, who is a non-essentialist philosopher, presented his theory of existentialism that aims at describing the meaning of life for humans. His theory largely talks about “Freedom”, what it means to be “Free”, and what are its implications and consequences. This essay presents the author’s opinion on the degree of freedom they experience according to how Sartre describes it.
It is important to first understand the discourse surrounding the idea of reality and existence. According to the essentialist philosophers, essence precedes the existence, meaning that for a human being, their essence exists before they are even born. This implies that being a good human is to adhere to your essence. This theory has huge consequences due to several reasons, but the most important one being that a person cannot define their own essence, as the essence existed before the person himself, and this means that they have to live according to their essence whether they like it or not, otherwise, they are living without a purpose. This happens largely in the world today, as we see parents planning their children’s future before they are even born. Jean-Paul Sartre raised an important question in this discourse that sets the basis for Existentialism. “What if we exist first?”, is the question. If existence precedes essence, then humans are free to choose their own essence, determine who they are, and define their life in the way they want to. An implication of this claim is that we, as humans, are born in a world where we, and our actions, lack any real, inherent, importance, because the universe did not choose any purpose for our being. Hence, it is up to us to search for our purpose. For Sartre, the essence of a human being is the meaning they choose to give to their life. This meaning can change with time, and can be as complex as humans define it to be, hence, existentialism is not a reductionist theory in nature. Another important implication of Sartre’s claim is that we are free, however, Sartre’s theory has an alternate definition of freedom. Any decision or action has a cost attached to it, and if you are ready to bear that cost, then you are free, if not, then you are not free. For example, smoking a cigarette has the risk of getting lung cancer. If you are ready to bear this cost and risk your life, then your action is done out of free will. Similarly, if you want to become an engineer but you do not want to study, then your decision is not made out of free will because you are not ready to bear the cost. Sartre describes the former as authentic existence, where a person feels responsible for their actions, and the latter as inauthentic existence, where a person does not take responsibility for their actions, or force it on others. Therefore, a person is free to give meaning to their life as long as they take responsibility for all the consequences associated with it.
Now that we have an overview of Sartre’s existentialism, let us look at a few examples and see how Sartre’s theory aligns with them. Steven lives alone with his sick elderly mother. He wants to join the military during wartime, and fight for a cause he believes in because it is the right thing to do, according to him. But, if he goes to war, he would have to leave his sick mother behind and that seems wrong to him. He can either stay with his mother and let others fight for justice, or he can go off to war, leave his mother to herself, and likely never see her again. Both options can be logically validated as correct because both have strong moral grounds, therefore, choosing one becomes difficult. According to Sartre, no moral theory can help him decide because no advice can lead him to a decision that is truly authentic. Therefore, the choice he makes – whatever it is – is the only true choice, provided that he makes it authentically, because it is determined by the values he chooses to accept. This example also demonstrates that Sartre’s existentialism leaves us with no moral rules, behavioral guidelines, or external authority, only that we are accountable for all the actions we take.[1]
Now that we have seen how Sartre’s existentialism aligns with a toy example, let us now look at some examples that are more relatable to the general public. I will discuss one example each from the academic and religious realms of my life, and present my arguments as to how they may or may not contain free will. Let us first look at a religious example. I was born in a Muslim family and inherited Islam as my religion. Being a Muslim implies that I have to live my life according to the way defined by Islam, practice things that are encouraged and avoid things that are discouraged by Islam. One of this is the daily five-time prayer that is mandatory for all Muslims. Offering it is not a choice but an obligation. Sartre’s existentialism proclaims that if this action is not taken authentically, then my religion is not part of the meaning of my life. There are several arguments that may claim that prayers are offered out of necessity, force, societal pressure, and not out of authentic choice, however, I see it differently. I believe that human beings have an innate desire to search for their purpose in order to better understand reality. When I look at the world around me, the universe, its vastness and its secrets, I feel that the reality is so complex that I can never understand its entirety on my own. I immediately feel the presence of Someone who has created this universe and is maintaining it. This Being is so skillful in His craft that he made countless beautiful creations, one of which is myself. This makes me bow down, succumb to His royalty, and put my faith in Him only. Therefore, based on the values I choose to accept, I believe my decision to offer daily prayers is authentic, and is made out of free will.
Let us discuss another example from my academic background. I started my undergraduate journey as an Electrical Engineering student, however, two years later, I chose to switch to Computer Science. A lot of people around me have the perception that Electrical Engineering does not have bright prospects as a profession in the country I live in. On the other hand, Computer Science has great market value in terms of jobs, academics, and business prospects, and that is why most people switch to Computer Science. However, that was not the case for me. I realized my passion for problem-solving and how coding enables me to do it. I realized that Computer Science lives at the intersection of so many sectors, such as education, healthcare, development, etc., and it empowered me to identify and solve problems that exist in the real world. Based on this passion, I made the choice to change my major to Computer Science.
The above examples demonstrate what authentic decisions are according to Sartre’s theory, but, what if the decisions we take also belong to a certain set of choices? What if there is only a small subset of all possible choices that is accessible to us? These are some of the complications that capitalism introduces into the reality we experience around us. Let us look at an example to understand it better. James goes to a restaurant, and wants to order a beverage. He has to choose from a list of beverages that are available at the restaurant. The list acts as a subset and constrains him without even making him notice. He thinks he is free to choose any drink he wants, whereas in reality, the restaurant is actually making him choose from a set of predetermined options. It is evident from this example that even freedom can be constrained in a way that those exercising freedom cannot notice.
This brings us to the conclusion of this article. In a nutshell, Sartre’s theory of existentialism is liberating and radical in its nature. It forces us to question the world we live in and challenge the systems a select group of people have created to restrain others. While these systems make it possible to maintain peace and order, at the same time, they make it difficult to practice freedom as Sartre describes it. I agree with Sartre on his stance that freedom is a fundamental right for everyone, as long as everyone is responsible for their actions.